Abstract
The frozen mummy of the large felid cub was found in the Upper Pleistocene permafrost on the Badyarikha River (Indigirka River basin) in the northeast of Yakutia, Russia. The study of the specimen appearance showed its significant differences from a modern lion cub of similar age (three weeks) in the unusual shape of the muzzle with a large mouth opening and small ears, the very massive neck region, the elongated forelimbs, and the dark coat color. Tomographic analysis of the mummy skull revealed the features characteristic of Machairodontinae and of the genus Homotherium. For the first time in the history of paleontology, the appearance of an extinct mammal that has no analogues in the modern fauna has been studied.

Introduction
In 2020, the frozen mummified carcass of a large carnivore cub was found in the Abyisky ulus of the Republic of Sakha (Yakutia). The locality, called Badyarikhskoe, is located on the Badyarikha River (right tributary of the Indigirka River, Yana-Indigirka Lowland; 67°41ʹ14ʹʹN, 146°46ʹ13ʹʹE). The numerous bones of mammoth fauna representatives are collected from the loess-like loams of the Yedoma horizon in this locality.

Radiocarbon dating of the find (based on wool) is 31,808 ± 367 years BP, calibrated (based on the Intcal20 calibration curve in the OxCal 4.4 program) as 35,471–37,019 years cal BP (probability 95.4%; CCU AMS NSU-NSC, no. GV-4961, accelerator mass spectrometer MICADAS-28).

Findings of frozen mummified remains of the Late Pleistocene mammals are very rare. In Russia, the most of these finds are concentrated in the Indigirka River basin. Over the past 10 years, mummies of various animals were discovered there1,2.

The Badyarikha mummy (specimen DMF AS RS, no. Met-20-1) contains the head and the anterior part of the body preserved approximately to the caudal edge of the chest (Fig. 1). There are also incomplete pelvic bones articulated with the femur and shin bones. They were found encased in a piece of ice along with the front part of the cub corpse. The specimen is stored at DMF AS RS in Yakutsk.